Everything you've been told about value investing is a lie, and I can prove it with real back tests. I'm a PhD physicist, and building models that don't lie to me is my actual day job. So, I built a code that automates value investing to choose stocks that are cheap compared to their true value, and it did not work. But, through my GitHub repository, a lot of you pointed out some key issues in the back test. So, I'm going to rebuild this incorporating your comments to find out if value investing actually works. Value investing isn't some fringe idea. In fact, it might be the most tested idea in the history of finance. The concept is pretty simple. The value of a company can fluctuate depending on public opinion and market sentiment, but the company has value of which can be measured in different ways, for example, by looking at its revenue growth or debt. These fundamentals can be put together to calculate what a company is truly [music] worth, the intrinsic value. And when the market value, or what it's currently trading at, falls far below the intrinsic value, we say that the company is trading at a discount. We buy that stock and see outsized returns as the market value and public sentiment changes and the price recovers back to what it should be. This concept has inspired a lot of YouTube videos, some of which are created by very educated people, even with PhDs, and I've always wondered why nobody has back tested this to clearly state if it works or not. So, when one of them tells you it can't really be back tested, that's a lie. A strategy can always be back tested because a strategy is just a list of decisions, and a list of decisions is exactly what a coding back test is there to provide. These are the same excuses that some day traders use to keep their audience buying their courses so they can make money off their audience and not day trading. But, people still believe in value investing. The value investing Reddit thread has over 700,000 members, and people in my comments genuinely believe in the strategy. So, if it does work, then a simple back test should show above market returns. Otherwise, we should all just buy the S&P and go to bed. In my last video, I built a value investing bot that used a Graham method with company earnings, an estimate of the growth rate, and AAA bond yields to calculate a stock's intrinsic value. We then validated this by hand. Also, thank you to the commenter that suggested I do that to confirm that the model was indeed making correct calculations. But, it underperformed a buy and hold strategy. There were a bunch of comments that correctly pointed out some fatal flaws in the algorithm that I absolutely must fix because value investing maybe does work, and I'm just being a negative Nancy. The sharpest critique of all was that my benchmark or what I was comparing our strategy to was super unfair. My stomach sunk when you simply removed the companies you couldn't calculate the fair value from your market portfolio. Lol. I had skipped stocks that I couldn't value with the Graham model. Maybe there wasn't enough data or the earnings reports were all zero, so I couldn't actually calculate an intrinsic value. But, instead of dropping them from the backtest, I actually left them in, which is definitely a big mistake. This is super unfair because those stocks could by chance performed really well, and I wasn't even allowing my strategy to choose them if it wanted to. So, if I can't calculate an intrinsic value for a particular ticker, I should drop that ticker from the benchmark. Now, before viewing the results of this improvement in the backtest, we should see where we left off from before. I'm using a discount factor of 50% here. So, we're only going to buy super cheap stocks. The green line is our value-based strategy, and the red line is what we're comparing to, which is an equal weighting of stocks from our reconstructed S&P 500 membership list. The white line is just the actual S&P 500, and you can see that I actually did a terrible job at recreating it, and I clearly have a bunch of survivorship bias since my recreated S&P 500 list is actually [music] beating the actual S&P 500. Anyways, it seems that between 2000 and 2002, the value-based strategy shown in green actually did really, really well. Well, sort of. Up until the point that stocks recovered to their intrinsic value, the algorithm then sold them all, and we basically found no cheap stocks for the next two decades. The value-based strategy achieved an annualized return of 0.9% and our S&P 500 membership list, or the buy and hold strategy, achieved 8.6%. So, this is pretty bad, but how does it fare with our improvement? Let's now look at the back test where we remove stocks we can't quantify with the intrinsic value formula. Recall that our fix should only change the benchmark in red since we're dropping companies that we can't calculate a Graham value for. So, this will have no effect on the intrinsic value back test itself, but only the comparison that we're making. And because of that, the value strategy returns stayed the same at 0.9% annualized, but the baseline was 8.55%. So, it actually didn't really change that much. But, I mean, this is a better back test, right? Anyways, let's move on. Last time, I hard-coded a 50% discount to make sure that we are buying super cheap stocks. And two of you pointed out that it's a little bit arbitrary. >> Try other range, for example, instead of buying discount is greater than 50%, try discount within 0 50% or instead of is greater than 90%, try other 10% range. >> So, instead, we could rank stocks by how discounted they are and then just buy the cheapest. And at first, it sort of looks like the strategy is working until it fails terribly. Yeah, I don't even really know what to say about this one. It just didn't work. The total return of the cheapest stock over this time horizon was minus 92.9% or minus 9.46% [music] annualized. But, there is a bit of a trap here. Manually tweaking the discount until it looks good is effectively just hand-operated overfitting, and the cheapest stock is also not always the best one. There could be a systematic flaw in the company we've selected. So, how about this? Let's try every single discount factor. And here you go. These are the returns as a function of the discount factor. There are literally no strategy returns shown in green that beat our baseline shown in red. [music] And also, yes, just a reminder that we are beating the S&P 500 over this time horizon, [music] but slow down. We're actually comparing to the red line because that's the return of the tickers in our database. That's the benchmark. The top technical comment in my last video said that equity curves alone are not enough and I completely agree. >> Please compare some sort of performance metrics. >> We need to show the risk-adjusted performance of the strategy. Specifically, we need to use the Sortino ratio. Now, the Sortino ratio measures the risk-adjusted return of an investment portfolio, but unlike other metrics, it only penalizes downside volatility. And yeah, I know this sounds super boring, but I promise it's actually rather straightforward and is a concept you can apply to everything in your life. Now, you may wonder, why do we care about risk-adjusted returns? >> Boring. >> I only care about the returns, right? I mean, that's the only thing that matters to me. And at first, that's what I thought, too, but it's not quite true. Because in making a high return, there was some risk involved in that trade. Now, let's say for example that you invest $1 million and there's a 50% chance that you see a 100% return. So, then it becomes $2 million, but there's also a 50% chance that you lose it all. Let's say that you come out of the other end with a favorable trade and you do get that 100% return. [music] Congrats, but you can't neglect the fact that you took a 50% chance of losing all of your money. You tell yourself that you will keep betting your winnings because the first time you did it, you got a 100% return. It was great. That same trade over many trades would guarantee that you do lose all of your money because the single time that you land on the other side of that 50% chance, your portfolio goes to zero. Even though you won and your return was 100%, the risk-adjusted return of that trade is actually minus 100% because you're statistically guaranteed, if you take that bet enough, to lose everything. So, we should always factor in risk into our investments, which is usually characterized by market volatility. Our Graham strategy has a Sortino ratio of 0.171. The S&P 500 buy and hold is 0.545. And our benchmark of S&P constituents is 0.666. Oh lord. Our strategy is roughly three times worse on a risk-adjusted basis than simply buying and holding, which is pretty bad. And over a rolling one-year window, the strategy beats the S&P Sortino only about 34% of the time. This strategy only worked well during the 2008 market crash, and that basically tells you nothing. And I'm not saying that this will never work. I'm just saying that the current strategy is not sufficient. But, I encourage you to leave comments below describing what you could test or what I'm getting wrong, and then we can try to implement this in a future video and improve the algorithm. So, if value investing doesn't work anymore, why do people keep making videos about it implying that it does? Now, I'm not a drama channel, so I'm going to stay clear of calling people out, but I have a couple of theories. Firstly, it's that the decades of genuine success stories like Buffett give this method real credibility. It's also the perfect thing to sell people on and just sort of make sense. Stocks are cheap, and you should try to buy them cheap before they recover. And finally, you can't easily disprove it yourself unless you're degenerates like me and you and test it with code like we just did. So, my honest take is that value investing isn't a scam. It's just that the efficient market theory has caught up to it, and it's up to us to create different methodologies to find gaps that are present today. So, if you find something that looks interesting, I'll test it. We live in a new age of investing where complexity is scaling exponentially, meaning old opportunities fade and new opportunities are introduced. Take care, and I'll see you guys in the next one.
